The player learns that a long, long time ago, a Dunmer (Elven) war
leader named Nerevar was betrayed by his queen (Almalexia) and closest
allies (Sotha Sil, Vivec, and Dagoth Ur) following their defeat of the
Dwemer (Dwarven) armies, who were using magical tools to try to create
their own gods to take over the world.  Following the victory Nerevar
entrusted the care of the magical Dwemer tools to Dagoth Ur while
debating what to do with them, however this trust was misplaced as
Dagoth Ur secretly studied the tools and transformed himself into a
god.  Nerevar, his queen, and his remaining allies were miraculously
able dispatch Dagoth Ur to reclaim the tools at that time.  Nerevar
then demanded a pact amongst them, to swear an oath never to use the
tools in this manner, and only to keep them safe.  A short time later
however, although the mythos is a bit unclear, Almalexia, Sotha Sil,
and Vivec either murdered Nerevar or simply disobeyed him, and in any
case broke their oaths by subsequently taking the tools and making
themselves gods.  For thousands of years the people then worshipped
the three, known as the Tribual, and forgot about the true gods of the
land.

This is of course an abbreviated version.  There are hints here and
there that there are more details to the story, such as rumors of an
affair between Almalexia and Sotha Sil.  It is also consistently
revealed that Dagoth Ur was not evil from the beginning, but it was
only when left in seclusion with the tools, against his will and at
Nerevar's request, that he was swayed to the "dark side" to explore
their potential.  Also, when the player meets Vivec, we see a
mortal-become-god that realizes the folly of what he has done and what
appears to be sincere regret for his betrayal--not the villian we
would have expected.

When the player enters the game Dagoth Ur is making a comeback, the
Tribunal is failing to keep him in check, and the people of the land
are loosing faith.  The player discovers he (or she) is actually the
reincarnation of Nerevar, the prophesied hero to reunite the warring
Dunmer clans and religious sects, free the false gods, destroy Dagoth
Ur and the Dwemer tools that created all of them, and restore peace to
the land.  The process of becoming the "Nerevarine" involves passing a
number of tests, performing quests, and a fair amount of running
around to negotiate with the Dunmer clan and House leaders.

